"FFCV" and related "fastxtend" projects are interesting (though stale) projects aiming to address data loading bottleneck (storage to RAM transfer process) in a common scenario involving large-scale training of vision models involving large datasets consisting of large number of relatively small image files, with the full dataset considerably exceeding the size of available RAM. This functionality is directly implemented by FFCV, while fastxtend bridges it with the popular fastai library.

FFCV is available as source code from PyPI and GitHub, and its installation process necessitates compilation. While formally supporting Windows, installation instructions are lacking, while Windows-related building-related code within the `setup.py` module is totally nonsensical and completely dysfunctional. The primary task of the FFCV's `setup.py` script is to provide information to `setuptools/distutils` necessary to construct compilation options related to management of external build-time dependencies (DLL calls).

The objective of this project is to analyze information and clues provided by the authors, establish actual information that needs to be provided to compiler/linker, and develop `cmd.exe` scripts for creating a Conda-based environments with FFCV and fastxtend installed into it along with all dependencies. The scripts' perquisites should be  minimalistic (compared to stock Windows). In particular, two hard requirements are `curl` and `tar` tools included in modern versions of Windows by default. As the project aims at using the resulting environment for AI training on a consumer-grade NVidia GPU, a suitable GPU should be present and driver installed (though). Finally, the compilation process targets the native toolchain, and its minimalistic version being MS Build Tools, which also needs to be installed prior to running this project's script. The project does not assume availability of any other special software. It does not depend on Python, as Python environment is bootstrapped using Micromamba downloaded automatically by the project's script.  

It is also an objective of this project is to develop a detailed tutorial for analysis, troubleshooting, and building other PyPI packages involving native compilation and requiring setup of build-time library dependencies not properly implemented by the authors.