# Storage Considerations for a New PC

The following considerations primarily apply to Windows systems, though they might be applicable to other systems as well. They also focus on management of a standalone individually-managed personal workstation, and may be less relevant to commercially used computers managed as a part of business's IT resources. 

When planning a purchase of a new computer, there are several storage-related considerations to be considered.
- External Drive
    -  Infrequent Backups / Archives
      A good, fast, and spacious HDD should work just fine. Presently I use a pair of 4 TB HDD drives to host two copies of mostly the same content.
    - Dual Bootable and Active Backups
      A good SSD drive is better suitable for scenarios where the drive is used for emergency booting, operating system installation, as well as for daily backups.
- Internal Drives
  It might be a good idea to have at least two internal drives: an SDD and HDD. Operating system, program files, and the master copy of data may be kept on a 2.5" internal SSD or M2 NVMe drive. HDD may hold downloads, local backups, perhaps, the temp directory (?), software distros (if necessary), other resources that might be handy to have locally, such as libraries and package caches.
  
  In the case of a dual boot system (especially incompatible, such as Windows and Linux), it is worth considering placing each OS on its own dedicated SSD (that is having two SSDs). In special cases, where a very fast storage is necessary for computational purposes, the fastest available M2 NVMe drive should be installed in the matching fastest interface and be dedicated exclusively for computational purposes, while placing OS(s) on separate SSDs as before.

## Usage Patterns and Recovery Cost Considerations 

For optimal system management it is important to carefully consider typical usage patterns and potential necessary costs associated with damage recovery. On the two polar ends are the system and use created files.

**System files**

By system files, I mean the files and directories created by Windows installer (such as `C:\Windows`), as well as any additional drivers installed. Additionally, I also include here three major runtime libraries - MS VC++ Redistributable packages, Java, and dotNET. These components are installed once and, except for occasional updates, can be treated for the purpose of potential recovery as mostly unchanged throughout the life cycle of the computer. In case of a damage, these files are straightforwardly recovered even without a fresh (or any) backup system image via the same installation process, with the only associated cost being time required to install them.

**User Created Files**

In contrast, user created files are typically the most precious among all stored files, often far outweighing any setup costs and the costs of the hardware. Usually, there is no efficient means to recover such files without current **and** uncompromised backups.

**Program Files**

Any additionally installed software can be reinstalled the same way, and, in this sense, additional software is close to system files in terms of potential disaster recovery costs. Windows installer creates two system directories to be used for x32 (e.g., "C:\Program Files (x86)") and x64 (e.g., "C:\Program Files") software packages installed system-wide (that is with admin privileges). While using these directories from the point of usage patterns (infrequently updated files) and recovery costs (can be reinstalled from installers without any backups) might make sense, additional software may (and often will) significantly increase the system image size and make it less predictable, complicating drive portioning, backing up, and restoring. At the same time, there is another important factor that affects optimal backing up patterns for different software packages (to be discussed below). For these reasons, the system program files directories should only be used for select installations, while moving the rest on non-system partitions.

### Windows System User Data Directories

Windows installer also creates another system directory to be used for storing user specific data. These data is potentially quite diverse. First of all, user data consists of two separate components:
- **System-wide User Data:** Includes the Default (e.g., "C:\Users\Default") user profile used as a template for creation of new Windows user accounts, as well as program settings and components that apply to all users (e.g., "C:\Users\Public" and "C:\ProgramData"). This component can only be changed with administrative privileges. Since most of the day-to-day work should always be performed under a limited/restricted account without administrative privileges, system-wide user data can be considered as infrequently updated. Importantly, if default user profile (or system-wide system-related user data) is damaged, recovery will likely necessitate the use of backed system image, if available, or clean up system reinstallation otherwise. If system-wide settings associated with a particular non-system application are corrupted, such an application may need to be reinstalled.
- **Individual User Profiles:** Contains various user-specific files and setting in a dedicated directory (e.g., "C:\Users\pcuser"). These files and settings (including user-specific Windows registry settings) only require the user account privileges (administrative permissions are not required) and are protected from changes by other non-admin accounts. 

Data/files stored in the individual user profiles can be further classified into several categories:
- **System User Settings:** When a new Windows account is created, the system settings associated with this account are stored within the users directory (e.g., the user's Windows registry hive file, "NTUSER.DAT"). These settings can be generally changed with that user's privileges (without administrative privileges). These settings are, perhaps the most important from the point of user's account usability. If corrupted, the user's account will be rendered completely unusable. The simplest recovery root would be re-creation of the user account, assuming this scenario is included as part of the system management strategy from the start. Alternative being partial or full system image restoration, though full system image restoration should be generally reserved for total system failure. If properly planned in advanced, re-creation of the user account might be a better route.
- **Program Settings:** The second major component of the user's data directory includes settings for individual non-system programs, such as office, CAD, or graphics applications (the standard Windows location is a program subdirectory within "AppData\Roaming" and "AppData\Local"; some programs also use Linux style location - ".{PROGRAM_NAME}" stored at the root of the user's profile directory). In case of corruption, the simplest recovery option of an individual non-system settings directory is deletion of the existing directory (possibly restoring a backed copy, if available).
- **Non-admin Program Installations:** Some programs installers use the same directories ("AppData\Roaming" and "AppData\Local") for hosting the package files (binaries and related files normally stored in a "C:\Program Files (x86)" or "C:\Program Files") when executed with non-admin privileges. If corrupted, simple reinstallation of the program should generally fixes the problems.
- **User Downloads:** The default location for user downloads is the "Downloads" directory within the user's profile. This design is probably only justified for shared multi-user computers, such as public (general or limited) Internet access points. Otherwise, the default downloads location should generally be moved from the system partition. In fact, if computer includes an SSD drive for system installation and a second drive, possibly a slower HDD, this slower (and cheaper) drive would be a perfect place for downloaded files. (The simplest way would be creating a dedicated directory fully accessible by the Users group and creating junction points, like "C:\Users\pcuser\Downloads", pointing to this shared directory, though, adjusting registry settings is also an option.)
- **Temporary Files:** This is the "AppData\Local\Temp" directory by default. It might be worth considering moving this directory in fashion similar to "Downloads".
- **User Created Files:** These files are probably the most important and the only component that should be backed up regularly. The default location of these files varies by the program. Windows offers the "Documents" directory (as well as a few others) within the user's profile for storage of user files. Some program default to using program settings directories (optionally treated as user profiles, that is, user data and user settings combined). Either way, anyone actually caring about their data files, should never use default directories (or system partition for that matter, if drive is partitioned) due to distinctive usage and backup patterns and recovery costs. 
  
  The system drive should generally be backed up by creating a partition image. At the same time, if properly managed, system drive should only be backed up after installation of the system and core system files. Perhaps another, possibly differential, image may be created after installing major non-system programs to include their files and general settings in the backup. However, beyond these early backups, additional system backups are usually not necessary. User files, on the other hand, should generally backed up using file-based tools (it does not make sense to used disk imaging tools). at the same time these files needs to be backed up regularly. This distinctive backing pattern justifies placement of user data files (and, possibly, important program settings) on a dedicated partition. 

### Program Files

**Windows Security Model Limitations and Application Installation**

Windows implements a relatively flexible granular permission/ACL-based access control to file system and registry. However, the security model is optimized for two general access levels: administrative (full control) and user (limited/restricted). The idea is that a user should generally perform most day-to-day activities using a limited user account. This way, if a compromised or defective program is executed, the potential damage to the system is also limited. On the other hand, to install programs in default system-wide location and set system-wide user settings, administrative access is required. It is the same administrative access that provides full access to all system files (with minor exception of kernel protected objects, particularly related to Windows Defender components). Meanwhile, most of user application either do not need any access to system files or registry settings at all, or could perfectly function by using user-level substitutes. The advantage of installing non-system programs with administrative permissions is that such application directories are also become protected from changes by processes with non-administrative privileges. Ideally, the security model should have at least three permission levels. The extra intermediate permission level (which could be modeled to certain extent via the "Power Users" group) would permit protecting applications installations from changes by processes with regular user privileges, while also protecting system resources from potentially compromised or defective installers. Only drivers and carefully selected driver-like tools would be installed with full administrative privileges. In fact, if an application supports non-admin installation in a user-specified directory, it can be installed by a dedicated "power user" account. If proper support for user-level installation is not implemented by the application installer, such a process becomes complicated (sometimes, the issues may be overcome using advanced tricks; sometimes such and advanced solution might be highly problematic).

Applications can be classified into several groups based on their portability:
- **Portable Programs:** While there are somewhat varying definitions of portable applications, the basic idea that the directory containing a portable app can be copied on an external drive, and the application could be started from such a drive on a different computer running a compatible OS, on which said application has never been formally installed, and this application would be fully functional. This requirement means that all required files, such as any necessary libraries, must reside within the application directory or be guaranteed to be present on all compatible OSs. Another essential requirement is support of the portable mode by the application. This mode implies that all application settings are stored in configurations files within the program directory as well. This way, when the program directory is copied, all required binary and configuration files are copied as well, making sure that the application not only would be able to run on a different computer, but also preserve its state.
  
  Applications supporting portable mode may be distributed as compressed archives (possibly, self-extracting archives, optionally including basic setup operations supported by archive) or packaged with an installer. Some non-portable applications are also distributed packaged with a wrapper launcher (as an alternative distribution) making such an app behave as if it was portable. Portable applications distributed as packaged installers must be installed once (if unpacking is not possible), after which the application folder can be moved freely.
- **Partially Portable Programs:** Applications within this group are not fully compliant with portability requirement. Application directory must still be self-contained as in case of portable programs, but application settings are stored in the Window registry or within the user's system profile. However, so long as all settings/data files are well localized (for example, placed in a single directory within one of the standard locations within the user's profile discussed above or in a standard location within the user's registry hive), the program can be made to behave in a portable fashion (pseudo-portable) using simple scripts (placed with the application directory) that export/import relevant registry key or create directory junctions in the location expected by the application pointing to the settings directory actually stored within the application directory. (In such a case, the application would use registry or files on the host computer, which often may be considered as a violation of portability in stricter sense.) 
- **Non-portable Programs:** Generally, such applications must be installed on the target system before use.

Portable and pseudo-portable applications are highly preferable over non-portable in two aspects. For ones, all portable and pseudo-portable applications can be placed on a dedicated partition. All such applications can be backed up by simply archiving all application directories and restored at once by unpacking such an archive, as opposed to going through a time-consuming process of installing and configuring applications individually. Another important considerations is associate with some installers refusing to install without administrative privileges even if the application could function as portable. Any such portable or pseudo-portable application can be installed within a sandboxed environment following by copying the application directory to the portable programs collection on the target computer.

## Partitioning Internal System SSD

A major advantage of having a single partition is not having to worry about provisioning enough space on individual partitions yet avoiding inefficient drive use due to excessive unused/fragmented free space. Historically, my primary motivation for partitioning the drive was ensuring efficient data integrity workflow and robust recovery in case of system corruption or worse complete failure of the drive. Because data recovery from a failed drive is generally a grossly expensive process both in terms of money and time, it is better to plan system management as if nothing could be done to a failed drive. I believe I have not used system backups for at least 10 years (thanks to both certain improvements in Windows reliability, but, perhaps, largely due to gained experience and more mature/prudent system management practices), I did burnt my previous laptop (this disaster could probably be also avoided by better maintenance practices). Another important threat to consider includes potential hacker attacks, virus, and ransomware, which may potentially compromise any local files rendering any data virtually damaged/lost. Consequently, I am sticking with partitioned drive, for example:

| Partition         | Anticipated Usage (GB) | Planned Size (GB) | SSD Over-provisioning (GB) |
| ----------------- | ---------------------: | ----------------: | -------------------------: |
| System            |                    160 |               200 |                         50 |
| Portable Programs |                     40 |                50 |                         20 |
| Data              |                    100 |               200 |                         50 |
| Buffer            |                      - |   Remaining space |                          - |

### Free Space Considerations

On an HDD, it is generally a good idea to plan for HDD size such that at least 20-25% remains free. Leaving enough free space reduces the rate at which HDD file system becomes more fragmented. Also, this space can be used by HDD defragmenters to speed up the drive. For SSD, file system fragmentation is generally considered as not a concern, even though there is usually still considerable difference between sequential and random read throughput, so this difference is considerably smaller than in case of an HDD. For SSD, it is generally helpful to reserve some space unallocated (a fancy term "over-provisioning" is use for this purpose). This space can then be used by the SSD controller for HDD maintenance. According to information found on the internet, 5-10% of unallocated space is suggested for a drive with moderate writing loads and 15-20% for drives with substantial writing load. For example, for a 1000 GB drive, value in the range 50-150 GB may be a good number. Because reserved space does not need to logically continuous, it can be split into a few chunks placed after the first three partitions above. This way this space will serve two purposes. It will be used my the SSD controller, so it will not be wasted. At the same time, it will act as extra space that would allow easy extension of individual partitions. In the unlikely case a substantial fraction of this space is added to partitions, extra unallocated space can be created then by shrinking the last (and largest) partition.

## External Drives

An external drive used solely for archival backing up purposes generally does not need to be partitioned. A dual bootable / archival drive necessitates special considerations.

### Bootable Drive Creator Tools and Targets

