# Python environments on Windows: Bootstrapping (via Micromamba) and Management (conda/mamba)

Python environments are a standard approach of managing specific version requirements for different applications. Usually, there is a top-level system-wide Python installation, which can be used for setting up virtual environments composed of specific versions of packages. Once the environment is set, it can be "activate", which is essentially replacing relevant environment variables in the child shells to point to the specific Python environment, instead of the system one. While this approach is a de-facto standard, it is fragile. Personally, I prefer a modified approach. While Linux distros commonly have a system Python installed, Windows does not. Python can be installed as a system-level application on Windows with system-wide "activation", similar to Linux, but I never do it. My approach is never having a system-level Python installation or global environment variables pointing to such an installation. Instead, each Python environment is standalone. All such environments are equal in role (no master environment); each environment is activated from a "clean" shell that does not have any pre-activated Python environment. With this design, the possibility that the shell might accidentally use a wrong environment is greatly reduced. The Path environment variable in any shell instance will either contain no references to any Python environments (baseline system environment) or a reference to a single activated environment. If activation process / scripts are corrupted, the application may not find the target Python environment and will fail rather loudly. However, when there is a second (system) Python environment referenced in Path and the process relies on Path resolution order to prioritize a custom activated environment over the system one, any issues with the custom environments, activation process, or even directory order in the Path, may result in application falling back to accessible system environment instead of failing with a bang, potentially causing subtle difficult to troubleshoot errors or misbehavior.

As my preferable Python ecosystem is Conda-based, ideally, I would like to have a compact lean standalone tool that does not rely on Python and permits convenient scripted bootstrapping of a minimal custom environments that would include a specific Python version and standard Conda/Mamba package managers. Once this environment is bootstrapped, the bootstrapping tool could activate it, and call subsequent scripts for installing the necessary packages using conda/mamba from the activated environment.

While there are several alternative installers for bootstrapping Conda-based Python environment, Micromamba is exactly as described, a single standalone executable suitable for bootstrapping Python environments. The official projects does provide binaries and some documentation for the Windows environment. Unfortunately, there are a number of issues with the tool, scripts, and documentation. These issues are not critical and can be managed. The primary difficulty is to identify them and devise appropriate workarounds.

